<!--[[[cog
# This file must be processed with `cog` to produce phototemplate.md
cog.out("<!" + "-- Generated by cog: see phototemplate.cog.md --" + ">\n")
]]]-->
<!--[[[end]]]-->

The templating system converts one or template statements, written in osxphotos metadata templating language, to one or more rendered values using information from the photo being processed.

In its simplest form, a template statement has the form: `"{template_field}"`, for example `"{title}"` which would resolve to the title of the photo.

Template statements may contain one or more modifiers.  The full syntax is:

`"pretext{delim+template_field:subfield(field_arg)|filter[find,replace] conditional?bool_value,default}posttext"`

Template statements are white-space sensitive meaning that white space (spaces, tabs) changes the meaning of the template statement.

`pretext` and `posttext` are free form text.  For example, if a photo has title "My Photo Title" the template statement `"The title of the photo is {title}"`, resolves to `"The title of the photo is My Photo Title"`.  The `pretext` in this example is `"The title if the photo is "` and the template_field is `{title}`.

`delim`: optional delimiter string to use when expanding multi-valued template values in-place

`+`: If present before template `name`, expands the template in place.  If `delim` not provided, values are joined with no delimiter.

e.g. if Photo keywords are `["foo","bar"]`:

- `"{keyword}"` renders to `"foo", "bar"`
- `"{,+keyword}"` renders to: `"foo,bar"`
- `"{; +keyword}"` renders to: `"foo; bar"`
- `"{+keyword}"` renders to `"foobar"`

`template_field`: The template field to resolve.  See [Template Substitutions](#template-substitutions) for full list of template fields.

`:subfield`: Some templates have sub-fields, For example, `{exiftool:IPTC:Make}`; the template_field is `exiftool` and the sub-field is `IPTC:Make`.

`(field_arg)`: optional arguments to pass to the field; for example, with `{folder_album}` this is used to pass the path separator used for joining folders and albums when rendering the field (default is "/" for `{folder_album}`).

`|filter`: You may optionally append one or more filter commands to the end of the template field using the vertical pipe ('|') symbol.  Filters may be combined, separated by '|' as in: `{keyword|capitalize|parens}`.

Valid filters are:

<!--[[[cog
from osxphotos.phototemplate import FILTER_VALUES
filter_help = "\n".join(f"- `{f}`: {descr}" for f, descr in FILTER_VALUES.items())
cog.out(filter_help)
]]]-->
<!--[[[end]]]-->

e.g. if Photo keywords are `["FOO","bar"]`:

- `"{keyword|lower}"` renders to `"foo", "bar"`
- `"{keyword|upper}"` renders to: `"FOO", "BAR"`
- `"{keyword|capitalize}"` renders to: `"Foo", "Bar"`
- `"{keyword|lower|parens}"` renders to: `"(foo)", "(bar)"`

e.g. if Photo description is "my description":

- `"{descr|titlecase}"` renders to: `"My Description"`

e.g. If Photo is in `Album1` in `Folder1`:

- `"{folder_album}"` renders to `["Folder1/Album1"]`
- `"{folder_album(>)}"` renders to `["Folder1>Album1"]`
- `"{folder_album()}"` renders to `["Folder1Album1"]`

`[find,replace]`: optional text replacement to perform on rendered template value.  For example, to replace "/" in an album name, you could use the template `"{album[/,-]}"`.  Multiple replacements can be made by appending "|" and adding another find|replace pair.  e.g. to replace both "/" and ":" in album name: `"{album[/,-|:,-]}"`.  find/replace pairs are not limited to single characters.  The "|" character cannot be used in a find/replace pair.

`conditional`: optional conditional expression that is evaluated as boolean (True/False) for use with the `?bool_value` modifier.  Conditional expressions take the form '`not operator value`' where `not` is an optional modifier that negates the `operator`.  Note: the space before the conditional expression is required if you use a conditional expression.  Valid comparison operators are:

- `contains`: template field contains value, similar to python's `in`
- `matches`: template field contains exactly value, unlike `contains`: does not match partial matches
- `startswith`: template field starts with value
- `endswith`: template field ends with value
- `<=`: template field is less than or equal to value
- `>=`: template field is greater than or equal to value
- `<`: template field is less than value
- `>`: template field is greater than value
- `==`: template field equals value
- `!=`: template field does not equal value

The `value` part of the conditional expression is treated as a bare (unquoted) word/phrase.  Multiple values may be separated by '|' (the pipe symbol).  `value` is itself a template statement so you can use one or more template fields in `value` which will be resolved before the comparison occurs.

For example:

- `{keyword matches Beach}` resolves to True if 'Beach' is a keyword. It would not match keyword 'BeachDay'.
- `{keyword contains Beach}` resolves to True if any keyword contains the word 'Beach' so it would match both 'Beach' and 'BeachDay'.
- `{photo.score.overall > 0.7}` resolves to True if the photo's overall aesthetic score is greater than 0.7.
- `{keyword|lower contains beach}` uses the lower case filter to do case-insensitive matching to match any keyword that contains the word 'beach'.
- `{keyword|lower not contains beach}` uses the `not` modifier to negate the comparison so this resolves to True if there is no keyword that matches 'beach'.

Examples: to export photos that contain certain keywords with the `osxphotos export` command's `--directory` option:

`--directory "{keyword|lower matches travel|vacation?Travel-Photos,Not-Travel-Photos}"`

This exports any photo that has keywords 'travel' or 'vacation' into a directory 'Travel-Photos' and all other photos into directory 'Not-Travel-Photos'.

This can be used to rename files as well, for example:
`--filename "{favorite?Favorite-{original_name},{original_name}}"`

This renames any photo that is a favorite as 'Favorite-ImageName.jpg' (where 'ImageName.jpg' is the original name of the photo) and all other photos with the unmodified original name.

`?bool_value`: Template fields may be evaluated as boolean (True/False) by appending "?" after the field name (and following "(field_arg)" or "[find/replace]".  If a field is True (e.g. photo is HDR and field is `"{hdr}"`) or has any value, the value following the "?" will be used to render the template instead of the actual field value.  If the template field evaluates to False (e.g. in above example, photo is not HDR) or has no value (e.g. photo has no title and field is `"{title}"`) then the default value following a "," will be used.  

e.g. if photo is an HDR image,

- `"{hdr?ISHDR,NOTHDR}"` renders to `"ISHDR"`

and if it is not an HDR image,

- `"{hdr?ISHDR,NOTHDR}"` renders to `"NOTHDR"`

`,default`: optional default value to use if the template name has no value.  This modifier is also used for the value if False for boolean-type fields (see above) as well as to hold a sub-template for values like `{created.strftime}`.  If no default value provided, "_" is used.

e.g., if photo has no title set,

- `"{title}"` renders to "_"
- `"{title,I have no title}"` renders to `"I have no title"`

Template fields such as `created.strftime` use the default value to pass the template to use for `strftime`.  

e.g., if photo date is 4 February 2020, 19:07:38,

- `"{created.strftime,%Y-%m-%d-%H%M%S}"` renders to `"2020-02-04-190738"`

Some template fields such as `"{media_type}"` use the default value to allow customization of the output. For example, `"{media_type}"` resolves to the special media type of the photo such as `panorama` or `selfie`.  You may use the default value to override these in form: `"{media_type,video=vidéo;time_lapse=vidéo_accélérée}"`. In this example, if photo was a time_lapse photo, `media_type` would resolve to `vidéo_accélérée` instead of `time_lapse`.

Either or both bool_value or default (False value) may be empty which would result in empty string `""` when rendered.

If you want to include "{" or "}" in the output, use "{openbrace}" or "{closebrace}" template substitution.

e.g. `"{created.year}/{openbrace}{title}{closebrace}"` would result in `"2020/{Photo Title}"`.

**Variables**

You can define variables for later use in the template string using the format `{var:NAME,VALUE}` where `VALUE` is a template statement.  Variables may then be referenced using the format `%NAME`. For example: `{var:foo,bar}` defines the variable `%foo` to have value `bar`. This can be useful if you want to re-use a complex template value in multiple places within your template string or for allowing the use of characters that would otherwise be prohibited in a template string. For example, the "pipe" (`|`) character is not allowed in a find/replace pair but you can get around this limitation like so: `{var:pipe,{pipe}}{title[-,%pipe]}` which replaces the `-` character with `|` (the value of `%pipe`).  

Variables can also be referenced as fields in the template string, for example: `{var:year,{created.year}}{original_name}-{%year}`. In some cases, use of variables can make your template string more readable.  Variables can be used as template fields, as values for filters, as values for conditional operations, or as default values.  When used as a conditional value or default value, variables should be treated like any other field and enclosed in braces as conditional and default values are evaluated as template strings. For example: `{var:name,Katie}{person contains {%name}?{%name},Not-{%name}}`.

If you need to use a `%` (percent sign character), you can escape the percent sign by using `%%`.  You can also use the `{percent}` template field where a template field is required. For example:

`{title[:,%%]}` replaces the `:` with `%` and `{title contains Foo?{title}{percent},{title}}` adds `%` to the  title if it contains `Foo`.